# lion-food-tracker-project

## Overview
### Problem
Food waste is a significant problem in America and the world. According to the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), an estimated 30-40% of the food supply
in the United States goes to waste, with a value of approximately $161 billion in 2020 alone.
Penn State is no exception to this problem, as a study conducted by the university found that
up to 30% of the food served in campus dining halls goes to waste. According to the Daily
Collegian (Agrawal, 2017), the food waste problem has been regularly occurring in this
community and is carried out by approximately 10,000 Penn State students who normally
have food at the dining hall. All in all, there are around 455,000 pounds of food waste each
semester. It is not a problem that only happens at Penn State, as many dining halls in other
universities across the world experience this food waste problem as well.

This waste not only has economic implications but also has significant environmental
and social impacts, contributing to greenhouse gas emissions and wasting resources that
could have been used to feed those in need. Furthermore, it exacerbates hunger and poverty,
as it results in less food available to feed the population. It is crucial for individuals and
institutions to take action to reduce food waste.

### Solution
Our solution aims to reduce food waste at university dining halls through using food
detection and food quantity estimation AI. To do this, our team has been developing an iOS
app using Swift that allows students to take a picture of their food and get rewards. We are
also working on a dashboard website that shows the various data visualizations automatically
generated by our data analytics pipelines to dining hall staff. These analyses will support the
3 staff to make informed and strategic decisions such as ordering food that is more accurate to
student consumption.

## Use Case
Our food waste management system is designed for university dining halls and other
food service providers who want to reduce their food waste. We believe our system will be
particularly useful for these organizations as they often generate large amounts of food
waste.

Our system will be able to generate different data analyses and visualizations to
evaluate food waste. This will be of great help to both the economical benefit and
environmental protection. The system will continuously update and inform the organizations
about the food waste assessment such that the administrators will be able to make
corresponding adjustments to food purchasing and preparation practices. In the future, we
plan to expand our focus to include local restaurants.
Mobile App:
- Camera → Dining hall users can utilize the camera feature to take before & after
pictures of their meals to collect data to train the AI. (Currently, we have an upload
image feature on the prototype, in the future, we will only have the camera option)
- Menu → Dining hall users can view the menu of each dining hall on their campus.
- Rewards → Dining hall users can earn rewards when they take more pictures of their
meals and redeem them for free food & beverages. For the future, we plan on
collaborating with local businesses. Restaurants can gain exposure by providing free
4 incentives (food) to our user base while having the opportunity to associate
themselves with green tech.
Website App:
- Kitchen administrators can view various data gathered from the user, which includes
the total amount of food served, the total amount of food wasted, the total amount of
food eaten, the most/least popular food served & wasted, and user feedback on the
food. The data can be viewed daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly.

## Video & Demo URL
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cLpWEZsU5t8

## Results
Achieved Top 20 ranking in the idea phase of the Penn State Nittany AI Challenge, receiving a $500 prize, and earned the Dave Hall Award in the Bardusch Family IdeaMakers Challenge
